Ethernet Standards

What is Ethernet IEEE 802.3?

The Institute for Electrical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE) developed an Ethernet standard known as IEEE Standard 802.3. This standard defines rules for configuring an Ethernet network and specifies how the elements in an Ethernet network interact with one another. By adhering to the IEEE standard, network equipment and network protocols can communicate efficiently.

Ethernet Standards are defined, managed, and updated by the IEEE.

The Ethernet Standards describe the properties, functions, and implementation of a specific medium. The media types covered in this lesson are Unshielded Twisted Pair (UTP) and Fibre Optic cabling. The diverse types of media provide different speeds of transmission and differing distances for data transmission capability.


Wireless Standards

Wi-Fi is the term used to describe wireless networks. Contrary to popular belief, Wi-Fi does not stand for Wireless Fidelity. For simplicity, Wi-Fi was chosen over 802.11 as a name to remember by the Wi-Fi Alliance.

As with Ethernet, there are many diverse types of wireless standards, the most popular ones in use today are 802.11n, 802.11ac, and 802.11ax. If you have the time, take a look at your WAP, and check what standard you are using in your home.


Network Addresses

A network address is any logical or physical address that uniquely distinguishes a network node or device over a network. It is a number or address assigned to any device that seeks access to or is part of a network.


MAC Address - A Media Access Control Address or MAC address is a unique hardware identifier used by ethernet in layer 2 of the OSI Model. Every Ethernet network interface card (NIC) has a MAC address burned in its firmware.
MAC address is in hexadecimal format. An example of how a MAC address looks: 

D8-D3-85-EB-12-E3
E4-AA-EA-3A-29-62
Note: MAC addresses are also known as burned-in addresses, Ethernet hardware addresses, hardware addresses, or physical addresses.


IP Address - An IP address identifies a device on the internet or a local network. IP or Internet Protocol is a set of rules controlling the format of data sent via the internet and local network.
IP addresses allow information to be sent between devices on a network. They contain location information and make devices accessible for communication. The internet needs a way to differentiate between different computers, routers, and websites. IP addresses supply a way of doing so and form an essential part of how the internet works.
There are two types of IP addresses, IPv4 and IPv6. Below is an example of an IPv4 address.


Network Protocol connection Vs connectionless


Computer networks connect nodes like computers, routers, and switches using cables, fiber optics, or wireless signals. These connections allow devices in a network to communicate and share information and resources. Network protocols allow communication between different nodes.

A network protocol in conjunction with standards is a set of conditions and rules that specify how network devices communicate on a given network. It provides a common framework for establishing and maintaining a communications channel and how to handle errors or faults should they occur.

Two common protocols used are Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) and User Datagram Programs (UDP) 


Ports

What is a Port?  

A port is a virtual point where network connections start and end. There is a particular port for each specific service or application.  

Think of it this way: 

If you try and visit a friend in room 101 and they are in room 102, you will not see them unless you head to the right room. Similarly, if you are running a service on a given port and try to connect to it using a different port, you will not be able to connect to your service. 

A port is a 16-bit number in the range of 0 to 65535, also known as a port number. Ports are standardised across all network-connected devices, with each port assigned a number. 

There are specific port numbers reserved for every service. The first 1,024 ports are reserved for commonly used services. The high-numbered ports, called ephemeral ports, are unreserved and used by dedicated applications.  

Every port links to a specific service or communications protocol. The target network device, say a server, can receive multiple requests on each port and service them without conflict.

Commonly Used Port Numbers  

 Much in the same way that IP addresses are split into classes, so are ports. There are three ranges of ports: the well-known ports, the registered ports, and the dynamic/private ports.  

The Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) manages the allocation of port numbers, the regional assignment of IP addresses, and Domain Name System (DNS) root zones. IANA also operates a central repository for protocol names and the registry used in internet protocols.


What are the different port numbers? 

There are 65,535 port numbers. The most extensively used ports, along with their associated networking protocol, are: 

Ports 20 and 21: File Transfer Protocol (FTP). FTP is for transferring files between a client and a server 

Port 22: Secure Shell (SSH). SSH is one of many tunnelling protocols that create secure network connections 

Port 25: Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP). SMTP is used for email 

Port 53: Domain Name System (DNS). DNS matches readable domain names to IP addresses, enabling users to load websites and applications without memorising a long list of IP addresses 

Port 80: Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP). HTTP is the protocol that connects us to the Web 

Port 123: Network Time Protocol (NTP). NTP allows computer clocks to sync with each other, this is essential for encryption. 

Port 179: Border Gateway Protocol (BGP). BGP is essential for establishing efficient routes between the large networks that make up the Internet (these large networks are called autonomous systems). Autonomous systems use BGP to broadcast which IP addresses they control. 

Port 443: HTTP Secure (HTTPS). HTTPS is the secure and encrypted version of HTTP 

Port 500: Internet Security Association and Key Management Protocol (ISAKMP), which is part of the process of setting up secure IPsec connections. 

Port 3389: Remote Desktop Protocol (RDP). RDP enables users to remotely connect to their desktop computers from another device. to connect to their desktop computers from another device remotely 



The IANA maintains the full list of port numbers and protocols assigned to them. 

Why Do Firewalls sometimes block specific ports?

A Firewall is a security system that blocks or allows network traffic based on a set of security rules. Firewalls usually sit between a trusted network and an untrusted network; the untrusted network is often the Internet. For example, office networks often use a Firewall to protect them from online threats. 

Some attackers try to send malicious traffic to random ports in the hopes that those ports have been left "open," meaning they can receive traffic. This action is like a car thief walking down the street and trying the doors of parked vehicles, hoping one of them is unlocked. For this reason, firewalls should be configured to block network traffic directed at the most available ports. There is no legitimate reason for most of the open ports to receive traffic.


Properly configured firewalls block traffic to all ports by default except for a few predetermined ports in everyday use. For instance, a corporate Firewall could leave open ports 25 (email), 80 (web traffic), 443 (web traffic), and a few others, allowing employees to use these essential services. The rest of the 65,000+ ports and be blocked.  

As a more specific example, attackers sometimes attempt to exploit vulnerabilities in the RDP protocol by sending attack traffic to port 3389. A Firewall may block port 3389 by default to stop these attacks. Since this port is only used for remote desktop connections, this rule has negligible impact on day-to-day operations unless employees need to work remotely. 

Summary

Having an understanding of standards and protocols and how they are implemented in a network will assist in troubleshooting layer 4 issues. The next module will drive into identifiers and well-known protocols in the transport layer.